I don't consider democracy to be
really functioning when one
side's got a loud speaker and
the other side is being forced
to whisper.
How have we managed to create
a system in which a major
voice, or voices, in a policy
debate is not able to be
heard, because it doesn't raise
enough money to buy the
access to talk to the
American people.
Our democracy is drowning in
free speech that's paid for by
all these interests that have
enough money to pay for the
microphones and the airwaves
to get their message out.
It's who has the money
to frame the issue.
Because if you don't have the
money to frame the issue, then
whether you're right or
wrong isn't going to
matter in the long run.
Well, the government may still
be a major threat to free
expression, but commercial
interests consolidating,
particularly in the
media business,
could be an equal threat.
If we have to rely on the media
to at least analyze what
the corporations are doing, and
the media don't do that,
how do we level the
playing field?
I don't know.
I don't know, Bill.
Funding for this program is
provided by the John D. And
Catherine T. MacArthur
Foundation and by the Bernard
and Audre Rapoport Foundation.
Corporate funding is provided by
Mutual of America, building
America's future through pension
and retirement plans,
encouraging dialogue
and discussion.
The spirit of America,
Mutual of America.
I'm Bill Moyers.
The guarantee of free speech in
the first amendment to our
Constitution is a great idea.
It means government can't keep
you from getting your two
cents worth into the
public debate.
But what the framers of our
government didn't reckon with
is that two cents doesn't buy
much free speech these days.
You can say anything
you want to say.
But if you really want
to be heard today,
we're talking big money.
The framers didn't reckon on
the mass media, and they
didn't reckon on the rise of
huge corporations, private
empires with the money to buy
the kind of free speech that
guarantees a hearing.
In this program, we'll look at
what this means for democracy
through three stories of
powerful industries who knew
what they wanted and got it.
And we'll hear from some forces
in the growing chorus
of those who worry that
corporations no longer simply
take part in the public
debate, they buy it.
Duplin County, North Carolina,
home to Cindy Watson.
She made a name for herself
here, and a living, selling
ruffle curtains.
She had never planned
to go into politics.
She was busy raising
three children.
And besides, only democrats
won elections in Duplin.
I've always been a conservative,
and I've always
been a republican.
And when my third district
chairman just asked me to put
my name in to run,
I had no desire.
I had never been involved
with government, local
or any other ways.
I was the first woman, and
certainly the first republican
in 100 years, that was elected
to the North Carolina general
assembly from this area.
She was elected in 1995 to serve
a small rural district.
Her platform stressed tax
reform and help for
agribusiness.
Her concerns included
typical constituents
and some not so typical.
In the 815 square miles,
we have a lot
more hogs than people.
Hog farming has exploded
in North Carolina.
It's now the state's largest
agricultural industry, larger
even than tobacco.
The swine industry has been
extremely good, financially.
We have car dealers that are
selling fleets of trucks.
We have restaurants here.
When I moved here in 1976, there
was not a Pizza Hut,
there was not a Hardee's, there
was not a McDonald's.
But Watson found out all those
pigs brought more than jobs
and prosperity.
The massive growth of hog
farms meant massive
growth of hog waste.
She began to hear from
constituents who told her hog
waste is definitely not a good
neighbor, especially when you
live downwind.
I really can't explain
the odor.
It's a nausea, almost a burning
sensations to the eyes
and nose, and it creates a
tremendous amount of flies.
We don't have central heat
and air in our house.
In the summertime, we depend on
cross ventilation, if you
know what that is.
All of a sudden, out bedroom
is filled with
this terrible stench.
And it wakes me up with
asthmatic bronchitis attacks.
I have screamed, I have kicked,
I have cried, and
nobody listens.
In fact, if you tell them
how it affects you--
the hog growers--
they laugh.
They think it's funny.
They say it doesn't stink.
It smells like money.
The hog population in Duplin
County increased a staggering
1,400% in the last 20 years
to about 2.3 million.
But the corporate hog farms
still dispose of the waste the
way it had been done on
independent farms like this
one, before hogs here numbered
in the millions--
collecting it in lagoons,
then spraying
it onto nearby fields.
If you're spraying hog
field, that water's
going down in the ground.
Your water that you drink
comes out of the ground.
So that's going down to that
water that you're going to
drink, sooner or later, if you
spray enough of it out there.
Ammonia gas evaporates from
the lagoons and the spray
fields, then falls back
on the landscape.
How do you like this?
This is algae.
At one time, this entire
creek was clear.
On weekends, or late in the
afternoon, you could come
through, and families would
be out here fishing.
And as I've come back, we see
all of our creeks that have a
green covering over them from,
I believe, thousands of the
lagoon systems that are spraying
ammonia or nitrogen
into the air.
She was seeing people being
victimized by business
interests that she had thought
were trying to help America.
Bob hall is Research Director
at Democracy South, a North
Carolina public interest
group.
He's followed what happened
after Cindy Watson began
listening to her neighbors.
--and I was asking those
questions that
you asked to me.
She was a feisty advocate for
her people, who were being
inundated with this massive
contamination from the hog
factory farms.
10 parts per million is the
EPA-acceptable level of
drinking in this state.
This is 17.18.
She went back to her core
values and said, this is
wrong, what you guys are doing,
these big hog people.
And you're my neighbors.
And some of you even donated
to help elect me as a
Republican.
But I can't do what
you want me to do.
I have to say no to you.
No meant challenging the hog
industry to clean up its act.
But the corporate farmers
had other plans.
They wanted to expand even more,
and they were used to
getting their way.
Many of the state's zoning laws
were written, in part, by
a former legislator named
Wendell Murphy, who just
happens to be the Chairman and
CEO of Murphy Family Farms,
one of the biggest hog
producers in America.
He's on the Forbes
list and so on.
But he was a State Senator
for a number of years.
And in that role, he passed, and
made sure it got passed, a
number of crucial pieces of
legislation, one of which was
that local counties couldn't
zone hog factory farms. So
that really created the
framework that allow those
farms to expand without anybody
money saying, no, no,
you're getting a little
too large.
No, no, the amount
of waste you're
putting here is too dangerous.
But Cindy Watson wouldn't
back off.
In 1997, she helped pass a
moratorium to limit the growth
of hog farms until the industry
figured out a better
way to dispose of
all that waste.
When she was up for reelection,
she anticipated a
tough campaign.
But she never imagined what
was about to hit her.
It started just before the
primary, when Duplin area
voters began receiving
probing phone calls.
Do you consider yourself to
be pro-like or pro-choice?
At first, they seemed like
objective opinion polls.
They weren't.
Cindy Watson is letting her
personal attitudes affect her
judgment, and often doesn't
have her facts right.
Political pros call them push
polls, loaded questions
designed to prejudice
the voter's
opinion of a candidate.
Cindy Watson flip-flops
on the issues.
It was clearly not do you know
that Cindy Watson is trying to
regulate the hog industry.
That wasn't what they wanted.
They were looking for any
possible way that they could
embarrass, intimidate, undercut
her credibility.
Cindy Watson is misleading
people about her record on the
environment.
Along with the telephone
polling came
a blizzard of ads.
Representative Cindy Watson--
Ads in newspapers, on the
radio, on television.
Public trust is lost when
politicians mislead people.
They all had the same theme,
condemning Cindy Watson and
shifting focus away from
hog industry pollution.
They were costing somebody
a bundle.
But who was spending
all that money?
The ads said they were paid for
by a group calling itself
Farmers for Fairness.
It's a wonderful name,
You think of here's Old
MacDonald and all the other
Old MacDonalds.
They've gotten together, and
they're fighting for fairness.
Oh, it's wonderful.
Here at home, Representative
Cindy Watson is telling us--
Well, it turns out it's
not at all that way.
It turned out that Farmers for
Fairness was a cover for a
consortium including Murphy
Family Farms and other
corporate hog interests.
It's what's known as
a front group.
These are groups that to any
ordinary citizen, you have no
idea what the group is for,
and you certainly don't
associate them with some
powerful interest. Charles
Lewis runs the Nonprofit Center
for Public Integrity in
Washington, DC.
His most recent book documents
the influence of
big money in politics.
The idea of the front group
is it's got to have a
highfalutin, nice-sounding
name.
It's got to invariably not
release any of its information
about who funds it.
And the reason that's valuable
to that industry is it's
another voice.
It's another entity in the
political process saying this
is a good thing or bad thing,
whatever the subject is.
And so you'll create the sense
that there is a growing chorus
of concern over some issue.
Farmers for Fairness'
spokesperson is Lu-Ann Coe.
What's your operating budget?
We don't release that.
I can tell you this.
It's been more than we
ever wanted to spend.
Your own consultant says Farmers
for Fairness spent
$10,000 a week in the months
before the May primary in that
one little district.
Why was that district
so important to you?
That is the heart
of hog country.
That's the heart, right there.
And that's where
Miss Watson is.
Representative Cindy Watson--
They mounted a massive
campaign, an almost
unbelievable campaign, for a
Republican woman from a very
small county, trying to get
rid of her, trying to just
abolish her from the scene.
Paid for by Farmers
for Fairness.
Here's an important distinction
to keep in mind.
Federal election laws strictly
regulate ads that tell you to
vote for or against
a candidate.
These ads can only be run by the
candidates themselves, by
political parties, or by
Political Action Committees,
PACs, all subject to strict
limits on corporate
contributions.
The idea is that candidates
should know who is financing
their opposition, that you, the
voter, should know who's
putting money up to influence
elections.
So if you buy an ad that does
advocate voting for or against
someone, you have to file
disclosure forms. But there's
a gaping loophole in the law.
If your organization buys an
ad that doesn't use those
exact words, vote for
or against, it's
considered issue advocacy.
And issue ads are not regulated
by campaign laws.
Representative Cindy Watson
blames hog farmers for
polluting rivers.
In other words, it can walk
right up to the line of
telling you why you should
vote against
someone or for someone.
It just can't take that last
step and make it explicit.
Kathleen Hall Jamieson is Dean
of the Annenberg School for
Communication at the University
of Pennsylvania.
She writes extensively on how
so-called issue advocacy has
become a funnel for unregulated
money in politics.
The practical matter is this.
When you get into an election
season, and you see an ad that
shows a candidate's picture,
and it's an unflattering
picture, and it tells you a
lot of things about the
candidate that are hostile, they
are not friendly to the
candidate, and the ad then
closes by saying, call this
number, for practical purposes,
everything up to
that last moment has looked like
it's an ad that's going
to tell you how to vote.
Why else would people spend
money to show you unflattering
pictures and give you hostile
information in a context in
which the election is
about to occur?
Were you trying to get people
to vote against her?
We were trying to
change opinion.
And if the people out there
looked at our message and
said, well now that makes sense,
I haven't heard that
side of it before, and maybe
what Miss Watson is saying
isn't quite all there is to
it, then if they voted
against her, fine.
If they didn't, that was fine.
They were using these issue ads,
and this is something new
to me, and new to all of
us, I think, of this is
the way to do it.
It's first amendment speech.
They can say anything they want
to, as long as they did
not say for or against me.
We are not a political
action committee.
We are just exercising
our first amendment
right to free speech.
And even we're so conscious of
following the letter of the
law that we had an attorney
who was an electoral law
expert to vet each one of our
ads, and our polls, to tell
us, is this correct?
Can we do this or not?
They use all this legal trickery
to do issue ads or
independent expenditure, all
these different things that
are very calculated.
But at its core,
it's politics.
And it's companies who can't
vote using their treasuries,
their resources, to
influence voting.
So one would assume that there
are corporate donations in
Farmers for Fairness--
Oh, yes.
Absolutely.
--exercising their
free speech.
And that's how you see it?
It's the only way they
could get it.
Is to buy it.
That's to but it.
It's the only way
we could get it.
We don't like to spend money.
So we want to make sure that
every dollar we do
spend, it's on target.
Was it?
It seemed to be.
Cindy Watson lost
the Republican
primary to a hog farmer.
Her campaign budget
did not include a
single television ad.
No exact figures available on
how much the hog industry
spent to defeat her, but records
show Farmers for
Fairness spent $2.6 million
dollars on media activities in
the year leading up
to the primary.
The State Board of Elections
eventually challenged the
group's tactics, but a federal
court ruled they'd done
nothing illegal.
The courts have generally sided
with corporations on
issue advertising, essentially
saying that limiting spending
is limiting speech.
But some legal scholars say
it's how huge companies
influence politics in ways the
constitution never intended.
You could do a PhD thesis in the
law on the strange way we
treat corporation sometimes as
though they were human beings
and sometimes as though
they were not.
Burt Neuborne, once the National
Legal director of the
American Civil Liberties Union,
is now Legal Director
of the Brennan Center for
Justice at New York
University.
For example, for the fifth
amendment, we never gave that
to corporations.
Corporations don't have the
right to be free from
self-incrimination.
People working in
corporations do.
But if the corporation were to
come into an American court
and say, I take the
fifth amendment,
the judge would left.
The judge would say,
you don't have any
fifth amendment rights.
Get out of here.
But with the first amendment,
we went exactly
the opposite way.
We said, no, corporations are
going to be treated as though
they are a human being.
And they're going to be given
the same rights to speak that
human beings are given.
In 1978, a Supreme Court
ruling effectively gave
corporations some of the same
free speech rights previously
reserved for individuals.
The people who will defend that
decision say, look, what
the 1978 decision did is unleash
this great machine for
the generation of information,
and that we are richer as a
political culture now, because
we have the corporations able
to put ideas and information
out into the public.
That's the one side
of the debate.
The other side of the debate
would say, yes, but the one
thing that corporations do
better than anybody else is to
accumulate money.
And for the corporation then
to dump that money into the
democratic process is to
unbalance the market and ideas
in a way that yes, it's
richer, but it's
richer in one direction.
It's long been the case
that money talks.
But in the modern electronic
square, where rich
corporations exercise first
amendment rights through
unregulated spending,
big money can shout.
It can shout from one end of
the country to the other.
It happened just recently in
a major policy debate in
Congress, powerful corporations,
using their
resources not only to mislead
the public, but to intimidate
the United States Senate.
Spring, 1998.
After months of negotiations,
Congress is moving toward
passing the McCain bill,
legislation to hold the
tobacco industry accountable
for the effects of smoking.
The bill had been passed
out of committee by an
overwhelming majority and looked
like a sure winner.
Under the agreement
we have reached--
Even tobacco industry leaders
were willing to sign on.
But when the bill was amended
to threaten their exemption
against future lawsuits,
they left the table.
The extraordinary settlement
that could have set the nation
on a dramatically new
and constructive
direction is dead.
Seven days after the Senate
Commerce Committee passed a
bill far tougher than the
tobacco industry ever thought
they would pass, Steve Goldstone
and R.J. Reynolds
bolted from the process, and
with them took all of the
other tobacco companies.
Matthew Myers is General Counsel
for the nonprofit
group Campaign for Tobacco-Free
Kids.
Then all hell broke loose.
Washington has gone
cuckoo again.
Instead of doing something
about youth smoking,
Washington wants to raise half
a trillion dollars in new
taxes, spend billions on federal
programs, create 17--
Tobacco companies didn't have
public opinion or a majority
in Congress on their side.
But they did have one thing
their opponents didn't.
They had money, all they needed
to wage a massive
propaganda war.
It's Christmas in Washington,
and they're piling big
presents under the tax tree.
They began with air attacks,
a bombardment of issue
advertising.
Over $40 million was spent on
this campaign, the highest
amount ever spent in a sustained
issue advocacy
campaign in the United States.
In a study for the Annenberg
school, Kathleen Hall Jamieson
examined the claims of tobacco's
ad campaign.
The underlying themes of that
issue advocacy campaign were
that this bill is a
big tax and spend
bill for special programs--
the implication is, and you
wouldn't approve of them--
that will result in a black
market and will not actually
produce a reduction in youth
smoking, but will produce very
expensive cigarettes.
That combination of appeals
aired at saturation level
across cable in the United
States increased the
likelihood that people
were misled about the
content of the bill.
This tobacco tax some in
Congress are talking about
doesn't make any sense.
The propaganda was carefully
targeted to influence not just
the public, but the senators
who'd be voting on the bill.
--more taxes for more
big government.
I'm going to remember this fall
what the politicians do
this summer.
The $40 million advertising
campaign was designed to
change the framework of the
debate, not so much because
they were going to change
American public opinion, but
because they were going to make
it acceptable to vote
against this bill by making
a vote a vote against big
government, big spending, and
big taxes, and not a vote for
big tobacco.
These are the real heroes of the
American economy, men and
women across this country who
work hard for their families.
And suddenly, the tobacco
industry became the protector
of the blue-collar worker,
the bastion against big
government.
Last June, there was a historic
resolution of tobacco issues.
This would have changed--
The ads launched salvo after
salvo of half truths and
distortions.
Now politics has taken over.
Instead of a reasonable debate
on the resolution, Washington
has gone haywire, proposing the
same old tax and spend.
Well, the interesting question
is what are the taxes on?
And the answer is cigarettes.
And what's the spending for?
And it's a list of things that
most people, if asked, would
approve of, such as paying the
states back for the Medicaid
expenditures they've incurred
by providing insurance
coverage and health care for
those who otherwise couldn't
afford it, but who were ill
because of tobacco use.
And who will pay the majority
of these taxes?
Working people, people earning
$30,000 a year or less.
Will the bulk of the cost of
this bill be paid by people
making under $30,000.
Yes, it will, but with one
important qualification.
All of those people
are smokers.
And so it's not you, the person
making under $30,000
who's seeing the ad, it's
you, the smoker.
And the reason for taxing is, in
fact, not the government's
appetite for additional money.
Cigarettes up to $5 a
pack, $50 a carton.
The reason for additional
taxing is to create an
economic disincentive for
teenagers to smoke.
There will be new federal
spending, 17 new government
bureaucracies.
17 new government bureaucracies
is simply false.
There's no evidence in the bill
that there are 17 new
bureaucracies.
Not even the source that's
cited, Morgan Stanley, would
argue that there are 17
new bureaucracies.
And these sources up on the
screen suggest to you that
some neutral source did a study
to conclude here that
there are 17 new government
bureaucracies.
But when you look at the source
what you're going to
find out is, first, it isn't
a Morgan Stanley study.
It's a Morgan Stanley
employee.
And he's summarizing
a speech by a
tobacco company executive.
As you move claim by claim
through this ad, there are
very few claims in the ad that
don't have some need for
contextualization.
Big taxes, big government,
big job losses.
The tobacco companies use more
than just advertising to
manipulate the Congress.
What the tobacco industry
successfully did was used
phone banking to call people
around the country.
And they would then describe
this bill, in a way that had
no resemblance to what the bill
looked like, and say to
the individual on the other
side, if you want to tell your
member of Congress how opposed
you are to it, we'll patch you
through for free.
Members of congress got phone
calls from people who didn't
even know what bill
it was they were
calling about sometimes.
But you can't get away from
the fact that members of
Congress count the number of
communications they get from
their constituents.
What is John McCain thinking?
He and President Clinton
want to tax 50
million adult Americans.
They also went after the
conservative Republican
senator who sponsored the bill,
John McCain of Arizona.
We thought Senator McCain was
for lower taxes and less
government.
Well, I've got to say that the
tobacco companies raised my
name ID, according to a
poll, to around 70%.
It became a household word,
McCain, unfortunately.
More like four letters
in some households.
But I really became aware of it,
really graphically aware
of it, when phone calls to both
my home and office, and
being stopped in the street by
people parodying the tobacco
ads which said, what's happened
to John McCain?
He's become a big tax and
spend liberal and a big
government liberal.
People literally would stop me
in the street and say, what's
happened to you, John?
Like as if I'd experienced
some accident or illness.
It's the largest consumer
tax in history.
It hits middle and lower income
Americans the hardest.
It was a dishonest campaign.
No one requires that it be an
honest campaign, but it was
patently false.
So does the first amendment
give corporations
the right to lie?
The first amendment, I think,
gives corporations
the right to lie.
But I also believe that one of
the lessons here is that when
journalists and media see that
there is a lie being
perpetrated on the American
people, that it
also deserves coverage.
And the media, in this case, in
my view, probably did not
do as much in informing the
American people about these
ads as they could have.
Well, the news media, in this
case, owned by large
corporations who profited
enormously from those ads.
I mean, the profits from the
ads went to the television
stations, which are owned by,
as you know, corporations.
I would not like to make the
accusation that there was a
connection, but I do believe
that the media, especially
television news, could have done
a lot more in covering
this, if only in the fact that
it was unprecedented in its
scope and expense.
Jamieson's research show that
during the months of the
debate over the McCain bill,
while big tobacco was spending
millions on TV to defeat it,
only one nightly network news
show, ABC's, ran a story
examining the claims of the
industry ads.
Coverage was minimal as well
on cable TV, which raked in
much of the campaign's millions
in advertising revenue.
The larger question,
then, is this.
If you're getting that kind of
income out of this advertising
process, don't you have some
obligation to provide some
alternative access to the
alternative points of view?
The tax falls upon the
American people.
While TV news offered scant
critiques of the tobacco
campaign, the messages of the
ads were echoed verbatim on
the Senate floor.
There is a requirement in the
bill that the money be
collected from these
hardworking, low-income
Americans--
--and to create more federal
bureaucracies and big
government than we've ever
created by one vote.
Among the most vociferous was
a politician who, for years
had been one of the top
recipients of campaign
contributions from
big tobacco.
What the tobacco bill is
about is tax and spend.
Kentucky's Mitch McConnell
did more than carry
the industry's message.
He flexed its muscle.
Hours before the Senate was to
take the most important vote
on the McCain bill, a vote
whether to go forward or not,
Senator Mitch McConnell, who
was then and still is, the
Chairman of the Republican
Senate Campaign Committee, had
a closed door meeting with his
fellow Republican senators.
And he's acknowledged that at
meeting, he told them then if
senators voted to kill the
McCain bill, they didn't need
to worry that their political
constituents would see it as a
vote for big tobacco, because
the tobacco industry had
promised that they would
continue to run the ads that
they had been running for months
long after the vote and
well into the campaign season.
In other words, translated
into simple English, the
industry's advertising
is going to
help you get reelected.
Mr. Biden, Mr. Bingaman,
Mr. Bond--
Tobacco won the war.
Corporate spending had
turned the tide
against a popular bill.
I would remind you that we
passed this bill out of a 20
member committee, 1/5 the United
States Senate, by a
vote of 19 to one.
Everyone predicted that the bill
would then pass through
the Senate after some debate
and amendments.
It ended up not making it.
Every corporation, every special
interest, whether you
like them or not, is entitled
to ensure that
its message is heard.
But you can't get away from the
fact that the influence of
money so distorts the free
speech that it's no longer an
honest and fair debate among
competing ideas.
It's who has the money
to frame the issue.
Because if you don't have the
money to frame the issue, then
whether you're right or
wrong isn't going to
matter in the long run.
I'm not suggesting that
one point of view
doesn't deserve access.
It does.
In fact, that's a premise
of democracy.
Views that we find abhorrent
have access to our system.
That's protected speech.
But what happens if we
inadvertently create a
situation in which by virtue
of privileging those with
money, we make it very difficult
for those without to
be heard at all?
Up until 1978, we lived quite
well, as a free society with
good free speech law, without
saying that corporations would
have an unlimited amount of
power to spend any amount of
money they want to
on politics.
Seems to me that we could say to
corporations, look, you've
got a pretty good deal.
You've got limited liability,
you have unlimited life, you
can collect as much money as you
want, but you can't spend
it on politics unless one
of two things happen.
Unless you agree to cap it at
an amount that won't totally
distort the democratic process,
or unless we find
some way to fund the voices on
the other side so that we can
then have a full-scale debate.
But I don't consider democracy
to be really functioning when
one side's got a loud speaker
and the other side is being
forced to whisper.
I know that the American Civil
Liberties Union, your old
colleagues and friends, remains
fundamentalist on the
first amendment.
No abridgment whatsoever
of corporate speech
or anybody's speech.
You clearly don't see eye
to eye with them.
No.
I mean, I don't think Madison
put that first amendment in
there just as a device to
protect rich people's ability
to dominate the political
discourse.
I think Madison put the first
amendment in the Constitution
because he was aspiring toward
an ideal democracy, toward a
democracy of equals, in which
individuals could speak, in
which the polity would be a
polity of free standing
individuals who could exchange
information and have that
information be used as the
mechanism for voting choice.
When the founders were
conceptualizing freedom of
speech, if there were the
tobacco industry and there
were the anti-tobacco folks,
the tobacco industry could
take its stump and stand up on
the stump and say to the
audience, it's a tax and spend
bill that will create huge
government bureaucracies in
order to pay for special
programs in a federal
Christmas tree
with a black market.
And it won't help kids
stop smoking.
And the anti-tobacco people
could stand up and say,
smoking is killing
our children.
This bill has money to reimburse
the states for the
costs of absorbing the
costs of the deaths
caused by the industry.
We want a campaign to minimize
children's use of a product
that has been advertised to
them, even though the tobacco
industry said they were
advertising it.
And the tobacco industry
could get up
and rebut that position.
And the audiences could come
and listen to both,
or listen to either.
But they each would
have a stump.
We're now in an environment in
which the tobacco industry
buys its stump and gets up
and makes its statement.
The anti-tobacco people don't
have the money to buy the
stump, and in effect, the
tobacco industry has bought
the access that the other
side can't afford.
We've now made freedom of speech
freedom of speech if
you can afford to buy
the access to speak.
Buying media time your opponents
can't afford is
certainly one way to monopolize
the public debate.
But it's not the only way to use
free speech to advance and
protect your interests.
Some corporations don't
just buy media time.
They buy the media.
It's a media-opoly,
a media-opoly.
The whole media's controlled by
a few corporations thanks
to deregulation by the FCC.
This was a satire from
Saturday Night Live.
They own networks from
CBS to CNBC.
They can use them to say
whatever they please.
And put down the opinions
of anyone who disagrees.
Was it a vision inspired by
paranoia or a cogent look at
the future of free speech?
When it is the media itself
that decides not only what
advertisements to take that are
political in nature, but
what free information to provide
the public called
news, and we've then
deregulated, allowed them to
own more within their
industries, we've let loose a
giant here.
Gene Kimmelman, Co-Chairman of
Consumers Union in Washington,
DC, has tracked the growing
impact of media conglomeration
on public policy.
It is dangerous in an open, free
society like ours because
we rely on the media so much for
public discourse, for the
expression of democratic
values.
Well, what does it matter that
Disney owns ABC, or that
General Electric owns NBC?
What does it matter to us?
The danger is not just
when it's Disney, GE.
It's when there are very few
companies that control the
most popular media outlets and
there's a policy issue that
comes up that could hurt
them financially.
It is very unlikely we're going
to get a full airing of
that kind of an issue.
Case in point, the 1996
Telecommunications Act.
In February of that year,
industry leaders from phone to
cable to satellite to broadcast
gathered alongside
government officials to
celebrate a revolutionary
revision of America's
communications law.
This was a love fest. This was
the President and the Vice
President getting together
with the Speaker and the
Majority Leader and the leaders
of the committees that
had moved this legislation.
After all, this was historic.
This was a major overhaul of
telecommunications policy.
First time in 60 years,
since 1934.
Today with a stroke of a pen,
our laws will catch up with
our future.
There was talk of millions of
jobs, tremendous GNP growth,
competition, choice for
consumers, new services never
dreamt of, lower prices.
It was a panacea.
This bill is an indication
of what can be done when
Republicans and Democrats work
together in a spirit of
genuine cooperation
to advance--
What the President didn't say
was that the bill's real
beneficiaries included the media
giants themselves, who
had lobbied long and hard
for the bill's passage.
Here you have the broadcast
industry actively working to
transform television.
Geoff Chester runs the Center
for Media Education in
Washington, DC.
Television's going to change.
Consumers are going to have
to buy a new TV set.
There are going to be many,
many more channels.
The rules that determine how
accountable local broadcasters
are to their community
are being weakened.
Station license periods
are being extended.
In essence, the
Telecommunications Act was
like giving the broadcasters a
blank check with television.
Do with it what you want.
One thing television
broadcasters wanted, and got,
was the lifting of restrictions
on the number of
stations one company
could own.
But it was another provision,
buried deep within the act,
that stood to make
them billions.
The free use of something called
the digital spectrum.
The average American does not
know what digital spectrum is.
They just don't know,
nor frankly should
they have to know.
They're working and being with
their families, et cetera.
But here in Washington, their
assets that they own were
being given away.
Again, let me thank you from the
bottom of my heart, every
one of you, for making
this great
day for America possible.
Thank you.
What was being given away
amounted to a set of new
channels over which it's
possible to bring us a much
better, high-definition
picture.
But broadcasters see in these
new channels something more,
marketing opportunities never
before imaginable over the
publicly-owned airwaves.
Having a piece of the digital
spectrum is like having the
keys to Fort Knox.
Digital technology will allow
broadcasters to take the one
channel that they have right now
and turn it into five, 10,
even 20 or more channels.
Digital technology will allow
broadcasters to create
interactive channels which
allow you to click on a
commercial to buy a product.
They want to take that piece of
free spectrum, chop it up
into a lot of little channels,
and make piles of money from
this valuable resource.
Now since we as the people own
it, you might ask, why aren't
we selling it to the
broadcasters and using that
money for all sorts
of social goods?
Well, that's a whole other
question, and it might speak
to the lobbying power of
the broadcast industry.
These people that bring us the
news, that objectively cover
the news, are out there trying
to influence Congress and
Washington as much as anybody.
Like the other telecom
industries, broadcasters had
been pouring millions
into campaign
contributions to Congress.
But that wasn't all
they were doing.
The broadcasters had hundreds
of lobbyists spread all over
the hill for a couple years
leading up to that period.
But the reason they're so
powerful is they don't just
give a lot of money out.
And they just don't have
a phalanx of lobbyists
smothering Capitol Hill
with their positions.
But they have one advantage
that no one else has.
They control the fate
of all politicians.
Let me tell you how
they do that.
There's an issue before
the Congress which
affects their industry.
Call in the station managers
from the congressman's
district or the senator's
state.
They all come to Washington.
They sit down in a room with a
senator or representative.
Now, there's never
any threats made.
There's never any statement
that if you don't do this,
we're going to say bad things
about you in our newscast. But
they are the messengers.
They are the messengers.
They portray you, and your work
here in Washington, to
the people of your state
or district.
That's incredibly powerful.
In the language of the bill that
we will be considering--
John McCain was one of the few
senators who opposed the
giveaway of the digital
spectrum.
Another was Senate Majority
Leader Bob Dole.
Now, let me get this straight.
America lends the broadcasters
a national resource so they
can increase their profit
margins, but they don't think
it's fair to pay rent.
But Dole and McCain were
lonely voices.
I heard and saw many other
members of Congress who said,
look, this is good
for America.
All Americans are going
to get a much better
picture on their TV set.
Things are going to be great.
And I agree with all that.
But why should a profit-making
corporation get that asset for
free and not have
to pay for it?
Mr. president when something is
owned by the taxpayer and
is of great value and we have
a way of taking that very
valuable commodity that's owned
by the taxpayers and
auction it off--
The digital spectrum could bring
the public up to $70
billion at auction.
But the broadcasters didn't
want an auction.
Basically, they wanted the
spectrum for free.
If we'd said, look, we've got
$10 billion worth of public
land out there in the West. And
we're going to give it to
various corporations in America
for them to use.
And they're going to give us
back some other land which
really isn't nearly as good
in exchange for that, the
American people would
have never stood for
such a thing, ever.
It had all the makings of
a major news stories.
Were powerful corporations
picking the
pocket of the taxpayer?
It's the very kind of thing
that broadcast journalism
often investigates.
After all, TV news
loves a scandal.
We have on NBC, what
is it called,
The Fleecing of America.
Where were they when their own
networks and other TV stations
were, in fact, lobbying and
getting what they wanted out
of the Telecommunications Act?
The provision of news is--
Dean Alger is author of the
book Megamedia, a study of
corporations and mass media.
He examined the coverage of the
Telecom Act on the three
nightly network news broadcasts,
from the beginning
of the Senate debate until
the night before
the bill was passed.
The telecommunications
act was introduced,
roughly, in May, 1995.
And it was finally passed
in early February, 1996.
During that nine months, the
three network news shows--
NBC, ABC, CBS--
aired a sum total of only
19 minutes on this
Telecommunications Act.
None of that 19 minutes
including a single mention of
the debate over whether
broadcasters should pay for
use of the digital spectrum.
If five senators took a
legitimate trip somewhere
overseas to investigate
something that might be
costing the American people
money, that would be reported
on the evening news as a junket,
costing thousands and
thousands of dollars.
And that would be news.
And maybe it is news.
Maybe it should be reported.
But when it comes to a billion
dollar giveaway to
them, mum's the word.
You will not see this story on
any television or hear it on
any radio broadcast because
it directly affects them.
You said from the Senate floor,
we will not see this
story on any television or hear
it on any radio broadcast
because it directly
affects them.
And did you?
Did you hear anything on--
No.
I never heard.
I saw a few print stories
about it.
But never did I see a
television program.
Later on, there was one,
I believe, on CBS.
But the coverage, compared with
what any other story of
this magnitude would have
gotten, was minuscule.
The media did not want to
discuss what it was doing.
It would be like a bank robber
stopping the bank robbery and
saying, look at what
we're doing here.
Let's have a press conference
in front of the bank while
we're doing it.
I mean, ABC, CBS, NBC, Fox,
everyone, who wanted to
discuss this?
They're all going to make
hundreds of millions of
dollars, billions of dollars,
over the next several years.
The last thing they want to
do is have a discussion.
I do think we should resolve
this spectrum issue before the
bill is considered.
Dole finally agreed to support
the Telecom Act in exchange
for a promise that an auction
might still be possible.
In the months following,
broadcast news paid scant
attention to the issue.
Meanwhile, the broadcast lobby
sprang into action--
Air is a wonderful thing.
--with issue advertising.
We all breathe it,
and it's free.
We use the air too.
Ads like this were careful
not to mention
the spectrum auction.
Instead, they claimed Congress
was planning to tax viewers.
Now Congress has a new idea.
They tax everything else,
why not the airwaves?
You'll have to pay more to watch
your favorite shows, and
we could lose them
all together.
Call toll free and
tell Congress
not to tax the airwaves.
Tell them--
In the spring, Congress quietly
gave the broadcasters
what they wanted.
There would be no auction.
They got $70 billion worth
of free airwaves.
The then head of the Federal
Communications Commission
called it the biggest corporate
giveaway this century.
So this industry has been
dumping obscene amounts of
money, tens of millions of
dollars, into the process
around the time of this
key legislation.
And we've had no public
discussion about it.
The public can't get upset about
it because they don't
know about it.
Because these guys control
the airwaves, they have,
quote-unquote, free speech.
They're protecting our first
amendment rights.
I feel much better when I go to
bed at night knowing that.
I do a lot of interviews
on consumer issues.
I have news crews coming in all
the time to talk about a
variety of issues.
And they always ask, what
aren't we covering?
What else could we cover?
And I always say, you know,
there's one very important
issue out there.
There's enough money involved
in this issue that you could
probably provide health
insurance for everyone in this
country who doesn't have it.
Or you could provide a major
tax cut to the middle class
and low-income people.
The broadcasters then
always show
interest. What is the issue?
There's that much money
on the table?
There's that much?
This is such a big issue,
what is it?
I say, it's if we just charge
fair-market value for the
spectrum broadcast companies
receive for
free from the public.
Usually there's silence,
maybe a grin.
Most say, oh, come on.
There's no way we're ever going
to get to do that kind
of a segment.
Are you suggesting some
deep, dark, mysterious
conspiracy at work here?
Absolutely not.
You don't need to cook up some
dark, deep conspiracy.
This is an age-old phenomenon
of willful people wanting to
acquire wealth and power,
whether the power is formal
governmental power
or, in this case,
building enormous empires.
It's not easy to get on the air
criticizing the media giants.
On stories affecting their
interests, no news is good.
Jim Hightower had a syndicated
radio show on ABC.
Jim Hightower on a Saturday--
The Disney deal came down to
buy Cap Cities/ABC and
Hightower challenged it, said
it was Mickey Mouse.
Jim, I've got news for you.
Who is this?
Well, this is your new boss.
I'm the chairman of the board.
Mickey Mouse?
And then he challenged the whole
Telecommunications Act
and said this is not good
for the public.
Now, bear in mind, we're not
talking about monopoly here
over toasters.
We're talking about monopoly
over your access to news and
information.
And it's information that you
and I need if we are going to
have a democracy in
this country.
Well, he was off the
air fairly quickly.
Now, ABC said they didn't like
the ratings at that point in
time, that the program just
wasn't successful.
And that may be true.
The problem for the public
is we'll never know.
We're threatened here not just
as consumers but as citizens.
It's our democracy
that's at stake.
Now, you might say to yourself,
well, the media have
never reported on their
owners or on their
behind the scenes dealings.
And you'd be right.
There was no golden age
of self-scrutiny
by the press lords.
What's different today is that
never before have so much
media been controlled
by so few owners.
For example, whether you're
watching ABC News, a History
Channel documentary, sports on
ESPN, a Lifetime movie, or
commentary on E!, you're
watching Disney.
And that's just scratching
the surface.
Disney brings you information
via newspapers, magazines,
radio stations, local
TV stations,
and of course, movies.
If you watch FOX News, the
FX channel, or the Family
Channel, you're watching a
tiny fraction of Rupert
Murdoch's powerful news
corporation, a global media
empire controlling newspapers,
book publishers, regional
sports networks, even the
satellites capable of
delivering programming
to 75% of the world.
US NATO officials fear--
When you watch CBS News, The
Nashville Network, or listen
to any one of more than 170
radio stations, including
several in the same cities,
you're hearing from CBS Inc.
And just consider this.
Not only do these corporations
have more media outlets to
protect and promote their
interests, they've never had
so many different interests
to promote and protect.
Just take one example.
The ultimate industrial media
conglomerate is General
Electric, that controls NBC and
MSNBC and CNBC, et cetera.
What is General Electric
involved in besides media?
Well, in fact, they're in
everything from jet engines to
abrasives to nuclear and other
electrical generating systems,
hotels, insurance and finance.
When NBC reporters come upon
some issue involved in those
industrial areas, are they going
to think twice about
what they cover?
There's a built-in, profound
conflict of interest.
It means that you're
not going to be
investigating certain subjects.
It means that you're not going
to see NBC investigating
General Electric.
You're not going to have ABC
doing a big, lengthy
investigation about Disney.
I heard Michael Eisner, head of
Disney, on National Public
Radio say, I don't want ABC
News covering Disney.
I don't want Disney
covering Disney.
If ABC doesn't cover Disney,
maybe for some good reasons,
we may not have enough other
people to cover Disney.
The media giants are making so
many deals with each other
that companies that might
normally be considered
competitors are instead
becoming partners.
This very exclusive club has
developed that determines what
we see on TV. This club goes to
Congress and gets whatever
they want, for the most part,
in terms of access to the
media system.
But we're all left out
of the picture.
The picture is even murkier
than you think.
Look at the case of
Telecommunications Inc., known
to its 14 million cable
subscribers as TCI.
The Discovery Channel, The
Learning Channel, and Animal
Planet are all joint ventures
between TCI and Cox
Communications, itself
a media giant.
With Comcast, yet another cable
giant, TCI owns the
shopping channel, QVC.
Then there's Bravo.
TCI owns a piece of that
channel, but so do GE and
Cablevision, which is even
more complicated than it
sounds, because TCI also owns
1/3 of Cablevision.
TCI's 10% stake in Time Warner,
whose cable operation
ought to be TCI's fierce
competitor, gives them instead
an interest in Time Warner's
vast holdings, over 24 book
publishers, 30 cable and
satellite networks, film
studios like Warner Brothers,
and music and magazine
holdings that link up with
the likes of Sony.
And that's not all.
TCI even owns two thirds of the
company that produces The
News Hour on public
television.
All this must make TCI
one of the true big
fish of telecom, right?
Well yes, but not too big to
be swallowed up by an even
bigger fish.
In 1999, TCI was bought by
AT&T, the very monopoly
regulators once broke up
to spur competition.
This is a tremendous danger
for our society because if
it's the car business and
there's mergers and
consolidation, we fear higher
prices, less choice,
concentration of ownership,
and we try to monitor it.
But if we make a mistake, you
can break it up, challenge it.
The facts are out there
to the public.
If it's a media company merging
with another major
media company, once it
has occurred, who is
going to take it on?
But the big shots don't care--
And what about that Saturday
Night Live satire on NBC that
did take on the media giants?
Well, it ran only once on a
live broadcast. Then it
mysteriously disappeared from
the show during reruns.
The Executive Producer said,
quote, I don't think it worked
comedically.
[FLAT TONE]
[LAUGHTER]
Please stand by.
It means there's technical
difficulties.
You have said that money and
speech is the issue of the
21st century.
What do you mean by that?
Well, I mean the relationship
between money and speech.
I mean whether people who have
the money are going to so
dominate the ability to express
their opinions, that
people who don't have the money
are going to be turned
into listeners, not speakers.
I'm not satisfied with that.
I'm not satisfied with a
two-tier first amendment that
says a relatively small slice
of the world gets to decide
what gets said, and all the
rest of us sit like
groundlings in the audience
and grunt about whether we
like it or not.
Because that's what we're going
to, unless we can find a
way to increase the ability of
people without large amounts
of money to either get access to
the media, to get access to
the political process, to in
some way break through the
huge screen that money creates
these days, so that they can
get their voices
heard as well.
The first amendment
is aspirational.
It's Romantic.
It says that the purpose is to
create a world in which people
can speak freely and equally
to one another.
And therefore, there's an
obligation to step in, at some
point, and even the playing
field so that individuals can
actually have real discussions
and real debate.
Because what we've now got is
not a real democracy with real
debate, but we've
got a plutocracy
in which money talks.
This law also recognizes
that with freedom comes
responsibility.
It clearly enables the age of
possibility in America to
expand to include
more Americans.
I congratulate the broadcasters
and their
surrogates here in the Senate
and in the Congress.
I congratulate them for their
incredible influence that has
prevented us from mandating an
auction of the spectrum which
belongs to the taxpayers.
We're going to be back later
with my interview with my new
bosses at ABC--
Mickey Mouse?
It's a big mess,
and literally.
Funding for this program is
provided by the John D. And
Catherine T. MacArthur
Foundation and by the Bernard
and Audre Rapoport Foundation.
Corporate funding is provided by
Mutual of America, building
America's future through pension
and retirement plans,
encouraging dialogue
and discussion.
The spirit of America,
Mutual of America.